cloud
and now i'm going to admit everyone
so
morning everybody nice to see you all
we'll just wait a little bit um
as people trickle in
a couple of minutes
fabulous
okay well
wonderful to see you all again welcome
to those of you who are new to the
series um welcome to
everybody who's been coming along all
these weeks
um
yeah this is the lse anthropology
research seminar in anthropological
theory
that this term pays tribute to david
graber
our colleague and friend
i'm alpha shah i'm a professor of
anthropology
and i'm sharing this series
uh this term
um before
i introduce this week's session i'd like
to remind you you'll have had an email
note
um but i'd like to remind you that next
week's seminar
we have cancelled in solidarity with
strike action that many staff are
undertaking
between the first and the third of
december
a dispute
with university bosses over our pensions
pay and work conditions
and
the presenters for that seminar
nanika mathur and michael hertzfeldt who
were to be
discussing bureaucracy
are going to make available their
presentations
as written texts on the focal website
for this feature
for the feature which is around the
seminar series
alongside all the other texts for the
series
but there will be
no seminar so just to remind you remind
you all
about that
okay so um let's turn to today's um
seminar
uh it's really
my very great pleasure to introduce you
to the three presenters who will make
two presentations this week
uh it's actually a rather different
session to the ones that have gone
before
or the ones which will follow which all
discussed one of david's key texts
this week we're going to hear from three
post-doctoral fellows
who all came to know david as doctoral
students in our department the nun were
formerly supervised by david
and who today um are going to try to
trace the influence of t two key um
anthropologists for david
uh in an essay um where he begins by how
his ideas this is david's ideas um have
been influenced by morris block who
opened our series david made the point
that ideas emerge in conversation and
never
from the
independent mind of a great thinker
alone
and when this seminar series we've
already discussed the influence of
marcel moore's peer classrooms on on on
david amongst others
and today our speakers are going to
explore the influence
of terence turner and edmund leach
on on david
um we're first going to hear from
giulio angara and megan laws about the
significance of myth for david and how
david's ideas on myth developed from his
teacher terence tanner
it's particularly wonderful um for me to
have julio and megan on uh
speaking with us today because they've
been co-organizing this series
uh this term
and are both co-editing the focal
feature that will archive this series
um
giulio is currently an esrc fellow in
the department
for his doctoral work
in our department he conducted
ethnographic field work in highland laos
among the akka
or a group of
non-literate sweden farmers
his work lies in the areas of medical
anthropology shamanism and ritual
efficacy
he's also conducted research and
published articles within the science of
placebo effects
dealing with the philosophy of mind and
cognitive science
and is currently writing a short book on
the global history of medicine and a
series of papers on the phenomenon of
collective intentionality
giulio recently wrote a glowing review
of the dawn of everything for tribune
also published on in in jacobin
um
megan laws is an lsc
research fellow
for her doctoral work she did field work
amongst the
um or otherwise known as the kung in the
kalahari desert megan i'm sure i've
pronounced that completely wrong but you
will correct me
um she was working in both namibia and
botswana
and her work focuses on experiences of
uncertainty doubt and suspicion
and the ways these shape relationships
of care amongst the kung
she's also been conducting new work on
these issues within the field of
conservation
focusing on how geospatial technologies
are being used to address
ecological uncertainty uncertainties and
the consequences these have for people
who are living at southern africa's
rural margins
megan had the wonderful task of being
tasked well by the department of being
um
uh of trying to measure the impact of
david's jobs um and and and
hence developed a relationship with
david uh
through that and also through his review
of her work
um
michael
um so we're gonna hear from julio and
and megan first and then after that
we're gonna hear from michael edwards
and michael um we're really super
grateful to michael edwards for stepping
in last minute because
andre gruberchick who is supposed to be
our speaker for today most unfortunately
and for very good reason could not make
it this morning
and michael um thank you for coming on
board michael michael's going to share
his reflections on david the influence
of edmund leach and the revolution in
myanmar
michael is a postdoctoral research
fellow at the center of south asian
studies at cambridge
and his lsc doctoral field work was
carried out in myanmar where he focused
on how pentecostal evangelists took up
democratic opportunities to publicly
share the gospel with buddhist audiences
so his work studies the encounter
between pentecostalism and buddhism
in the context of myanmar's so-called
transition
michael was also a graduate teaching
assistant here in the department to an
introduction course that um
introduction to anthropology course that
david taught
um and and and knew him you know from
that time
um
okay michael thanks again for stepping
in last minute and um with that um
before we let's we hear from you michael
uh let's turn
first to julio and megan on david
terence turner and myth
over to you guys
thank you so much alpha for the
introduction and for inviting us to give
this talk
so we um yeah we will have some slides
sorry just to show you so basically we
um we've written this paper and it's uh
very much in draft format so we'll be
presenting different parts of it but we
wrote the paper together so we're not
sort of presenting our own bits we're
just presenting different parts of the
paper and um i know it does go without
go without saying usually but it is very
much in draft format and it is about uh
areas of anthropology that we're sort of
only just kind of coming to terms with
so we'd welcome any kind of feedback or
guidance on those as we go ahead
and so i'm going to share my screen to
show you some slides in the hope that as
well that this makes it sort of easier
to follow the key points that we
would like to make
what do i present
so this paper is called towards a
progressive theory of myth
david's work is often described as myth
bursting his most recent scholarly work
with david wengrow is explicitly so a
weeding out excuse the farming pun of
many of the most entrenched
enlightenment myths about human history
and the origins of social inequality
but what we think makes his way of myth
busting particularly compelling
is that it is informed by a theory of
myth itself of what myth is what it does
and how it stands in relation to human
creativity and social transformation
the study
of myth for david was not an arbitrary
indulgence it was central to his overall
take on the scope of anthropology
for him anthropology was most valuable
as a comparative inquiry into human
possibilities one that threw our
contemporary myths into sharp relief and
that was key to our own creative
potential and possibilities for social
transformation
though david never published
specifically on myth the theme emerges
in a variety of guises throughout his
work in the value book in the essays
collected in possibilities and of course
in the dawn of everything he often
taught courses on myth and ritual before
his death he had also prepared a series
of lectures focused on gregory bateson's
naven mythical complex
most importantly however in 2017 he
wrote a long forward to terry turner's
the fire of the jaguar a detailed
structural analysis of the kaiapo myth
on the origin of cooking fire
we learned from this not only the value
that david saw in the anthropological
study of myth but the huge influence
that turner had on his thinking and his
approach
terry was for david what david is for
many of us someone with quote a
remarkable ability to make still
extremely complicated ideas sound like
matter-of-fact common sense and even to
render them fairly straightforward
unquote
as david laments what terry turner could
do in person however in no way
corresponded to his written work
as we similarly found
uh when we began preparing this paper
terry turner's writing was impenetrable
david himself admitted that initially
did not understand the word of toner's
work once he understood it however he
began he came to regard turner as the
most underrated social theorist of the
last 50 years and the fire of the jaguar
as one of the greatest achievements of
anthropological theory that should
deserve a place among the classics
we dug deeper
and to our and to our surprise we came
to see turner in much of david's
thinking and in his approach to
anthropology
given david's political life his
interest in myth seems surprising
in a pedigree that goes to machia
goes from machia eliade to jordan
peterson the study of myth has
traditionally been the province of the
politically conservative though there
are a variety of ways a variety of
approaches to myth among them for many
myths either reflect universal
structures of the human mind or they
resolve contradictions related mainly to
individual experience
they have no direct relationship to
social organization let alone to social
transformation
but what david saw in turner was quite
the opposite a rare progressive theory
of myth he put it where myth emerges as
the embodiment if not as the paragon of
human collective creativity a reflection
on the different ways we choose to
organize ourselves and the similar ways
we reproduce those forms
in what follows we examine these
connections we show how this argument
originates from a radical rethinking of
structuralism and we consider how it
came to fashion david's way of doing
anthropology
but first a few words on the fire of the
jaguar
the fire of the jaguar is the most
prominent myth of the cayepol
an amazonian group of territorial
research for over 50 years
the me recounts the story of a young
kaipo boy who is adopted by jaggers who
then teach him how to use cooking fire
knowledge that he brings back to the
kaiapo community
from a standard point of view the myth
seemingly explains how
attainful's full sociality out of nature
a process that is reflected in the
manipulation and then replication of
fire
the myth features a complex pattern of
transformations each corresponding to
appropriate actions and behavior and
behaviors in hypo society this
ultimately fosters an awareness of
actions and how to adapt these these
inappropriate ways to reproduce the
social order
tennis analysis of this myth is probably
the most detailed analysis of a single
made in anthropological literature
it is structured in character but very
different and inhibits you much more
compelling than the structuralism only
destroys
unlike the latter turner is not
interesting interested in comparing
different myths to reveal an underlying
code
rather he embeds his analysis of me in
higher socioeconomic organization
which he knew very well
what he argues is that the mythical
development of the life
of a boy reveals a model not only for
the socialization of youth but also for
the consolidation of help for society as
a whole
in kaya materially local communities
men must undergo an emotional disruptive
process of detachment as they move from
the
natal home the communal main house and
finally finally to the house of their
in-laws
by recounting parallel processes and
detachment the myth of the fire of the
jaguar refrains the tensions
contradictions of this experience
in so doing meat functions is an
important means whereby societies are
able to shape behavior into collectively
prescribed organizational patterns
ultimately turner suggests the
chiropractic and such organization stand
the evaluation of circular causality
with one another
he arrives to making this argument
it arrives this argument by making a
fundamental move away from levistro's
structuralism
the minimal units of myth in his
analysis are not categories types of
beings or type of objects but actions
the difference between categories and
actions is that actions when repeated
force you to consciously acknowledge
pattern
and that's ultimately what structure is
for turner this is a pattern of action
or in his words
a group of transformations are bounded
together being varying constraints
this type of structure however is always
dialectic as soon as the pattern itself
shows
diversification you're forced to create
a higher level of abstraction in order
to account for and compare differences
which in turn can lead to yet another
higher level and so on
turner takes this idea of the electrical
structure and related vocabulary from
plj and cybernetics
is that the adaptation of these theories
in anthropology might be at times
counterintuitive or difficult to follow
for the big graver it is central
and it moves forward to clarify what
terminal wants to say he offers the
following example
consider the action of
the child
the moment you do this twice but with
the understanding that it is the same
action you performed before you generate
to repetition the kind of hierarchy
since there is a more abstract level at
which those actions are about talking at
the same time
but the moment you say um one says a
different kind of repeated action is not
the same say giving food to the husband
or to arrival at the competitive feast
one is generating a third level where
differences different types are being
compared
at the same time by defining certain
types of action this way one is
typically generating certain identities
like child husband or rival
kinds of person
who typically performs such actions uh
which in turn leads you to consider or
yet a higher level of analysis how these
identities relate to one another and so
forth
structure in short is always dynamic and
open-ended and always develops for lower
level structures
actions sorry
then applies this analysis to both
kaiapo social organization
and the meat of origin
overall turner claims to have
demonstrated that at least among the
kaiapo the dynamic structures of meat
and social social organization parallel
one another
one of turner central theoretical
arguments define the java is that what
we usually consider mythical thoughts
the central message of men
tops the highest level social
organization essentially the function of
meth is to contain this potentially
never-handling dialectical process
at some point the complexity social
reality
of why we treat one another the way we
do or why we value certain actions over
others
becomes such that we are unable to form
a higher level of abstractions or
conform
what meat does is preventing the need to
construct that level because it treats
contradiction in the structure of
society is playing out within the terms
of the structure itself
for turner all of this explain also
explains the reason why most meets are
about the origins of social institutions
in order to avoid having to consciously
create a higher level of ourselves we
attribute the origin of social
institutions to a mythical power in the
distant past
this is why kaiapo for instance regards
the very power to create and maintain
the social order fire as originating for
the an extra social source the jaguar
to sum up
internationalism that makes a radical
departure from legislative because first
it takes actions rather than ideas
starting points
nature and society are not static
categories but emerges as modes of
action
mode of action
modes of action
continuously intention one another
they made in short does not reflect
static aspects of society but the
processes to reach these aspects are
produced and maintained
it reflects the dynamic structure that
is
um second it takes the perspective of
the subjects rather than of the analyst
these are the tensions and processes
lived by the kayak which shaped the
values and subjectivity and reproduction
of society
it may help to turn briefly away from
turner and consider the argument from
the perspective of the trickster a
common figure in myth
if you adopt the popular approach to
myth which focuses on essence or nature
or things as they are then we see the
trickster as representing an
irresolvable contradiction between
personal desire or freedom and social
commitments
if you adopt the approach advocate
advocated by turner which focuses on how
things come to be or with the effects of
their actions
then we see the myth resolving
distinctions but by showing that freedom
and the satisfaction person person
desires depends
upon the care that comes from leading
socially to commit oneself to the social
is therefore to ensure
one's own freedom and the satisfaction
of one's desires not once but over the
course of one's lifetime
it is hard of course to give justice to
the complexity of turner's thoughts on
myth in a few paragraphs
we have offered but a glimpse of it we
hope however to have given a sense of
how these ideas have been so important
for david the causal significance of
myth the focus on action the emphasis on
social production the conscious creation
of structure the very idea of dynamic
structuralism
david endlessly reworked these ideas
throughout his writing the aspect we are
most interested in focusing on however
is that of social creativity
myth internist view is the creative end
product of a dialectical process which
enables a system of social relations and
eases social integration
in their capacity to give support to
different types of social organization
it is therefore possible to see the
variety of myths we find across cultures
as a vast compendium of human creativity
but and this is something david finds
particularly curious myth is also
creativity turned against itself
most myths are about how latter-day
humans can't be genuinely creative
anymore they so often appear to be about
the fixing of either natural differences
or social relations
the kayapo offer a good example of this
the creation myths of junta or hong
speakers among whom i did fieldwork are
another good example they speak of a
time when different beings had no fixed
form and of how and this is significant
humans then branded the animals with
fire to give them their distinctive
characteristics and set in place the
relationships between them
it is natural here for both turner and
grey
to turn to marx's idea of alienation
because so defined myth does appear to
be a form of alienated
self-consciousness
in other words we create our physical
worlds but we are unaware of and hence
not in control of the process by which
we do so
as turner puts it myths appear to
present us with
the form of the natural universe and
this form is then seen as self-existing
prior to any particular instance of
human social activity
in other words you appear to be
presented with the way things are not
with the way with how they came to be
and in the process you confer upon that
which you yourself you confer power upon
that which you yourself created
there is clearly a potential dark side
to it
as marx argues there is a necessary link
between humans misunderstanding of the
process of their own creativity and
forms of authority and exploitation
now one of the problems in seeing things
this way is that from an anthropological
perspective one risks being
condescending to people like the kaiapo
are we really prepared to say that the
kayaker live under a form of alienated
consciousness david reflects on this
dilemma in a number of places most
explicitly in his criticism of the
ontological term
his take is twofold first he writes the
dilemma changes as soon as we realize
that we frequently criticize our
colleagues our colleagues own
assumptions about the workings of
society denying the possibility of
saying that the kayaker wrong in their
own assumptions would amount to denying
their status as potential intellectual
peers
second they're certainly capable of
questioning the foundations of their own
thought and actions we should not assume
that they are questioning
the foundations of their own thought or
actions or that there's any particular
reason why they should
as turner points out the kaiapo
are fully conscious of constructing
themselves and their society through
myth we see this same phenomenon in
david's writing on fetishism
drawing upon ethnographic research from
west africa from from the 17th to the
19th century he writes that fetishes
from the west african viewpoint are not
simply objects that are presumed to have
power over us
their objects recognized as creations in
other words as embodiments of intentions
and actions that have power over us
these like myths can embody social
creativity because they have the power
to establish new relations
the danger comes when we take this power
as fact
when quote when fetishism gives way to
theology the absolute assurance that the
gods are real the assurance in other
words that such power is immutable
similarly with myth the danger comes
when we elevate myth as fact when we do
this we risk losing sight of those
moments as turner puts it when the forms
we take as natural or given are in fact
the perfectity of human agents and to
this end might actually be transformed
in many of his writings in many of his
writings david states that this is the
condition we find ourselves in now we
forget as his popular line puts it that
the ultimate hidden truth of the world
is that it is something we make and
could just as easily make differently
he and david wenger reflect at length on
this point in the dawn of everything
they show how
our enlightenment myth of origin takes
the linear growth of social complexity
and hierarchy as natural or given
curiously where virtually all other
origin myths start with a creative event
with the branding of animals or the
mastery of fire the enlightenment myth
appears to start with nothing and seems
to negate the possibility of social
creativity entirely
this brings us to the final section of
our paper where we reflect on david's
scholarly efforts to challenge our own
contemporary myths and their social
effects
so um did it saw anthropology as their
logic enterprise they even brought the
willingness to turn to others to
challenge the violated assumptions or
myths the color our own experience of
the world
he knew that anthropologists cannot take
a view from nowhere as philosopher
thomas nagel put says as all social
scientists and they labor under the
weight of their own culture-specific
assumptions
some of david's david's contemporaries
most notably those aligned with the
writing and culture as well as
post-structuralists and post-humanist
scholars so this as a dominant
indictment of the impossibility of
anthropology as an objective science
for david it was its main strength it is
precisely by turning it to the
ethnography specifically to comparison
that is so important we see it possible
to challenge our own means and it was in
this case the anthropology was most
valuable for him
and how does the dynamic structure it's
meant to turn a feeling into this
as we have examined one important
difference between structuralism as is
passed by libya's trolls and dynamic
structuralism is that the format takes
mythology to have
no obvious practical function and
another direct link to social reality
the latter the latter to the contrary
takes mythology not only to reflect the
structure of social relations and appeal
in concrete
effective terms to those who listen to
them they are
they are external good set of course
powerful devices for supporting a given
forms of social organization and quotes
if you assume a relation of circular
causality between meat and social
organization then this has obvious
political implications um if you can
change one year by high chance of
changing the other
whether this certificate causality
between meat and social organization is
actually in place can be questioned but
david is convinced that there is it
turns to our contemporary mates to draw
attention uh to their consequences and
to challenge them
ernesto de martino once wrote that the
task of anthropology lies in the
possibility of positive problems whose
solution leads to an expansion of the
self-consciousness of our own
civilization only then can anthropology
help the formation of a wider humanism
and of course
with some reservations on the term
civilization david graver we surely
embraced the spirit
once he said unto it there i am bored of
post-humanists i think i am a
pre-humanist
humanity is something we aspire to
achieve at some point in the future
but david would also add that though
anthropology is uniquely placed to
fulfill this role
the aspiration to achieve a wider
humanism is by no means exclusive the
society that invented anthropology
in one way or another it has been the
primal moving force of all cultures
in his marilyn stratton's lecture we
argue that what we call cultures should
be seen as examples of success for
social movements particularly as the
outcome of a creative process of
refusing
and it is not a coincidence the many
acronyms the name culture gives to
itself
actually mean human suggesting perhaps
they see themselves as having achieved
that
such status
the dawn of everything considerably
expands the argument with the starting's
lecture
[Music]
weber and wenger not only engage in
their own process of creative refusal
refusal challenging enduring
enlightenment mix and their socially
deleted effects they show that the world
they show that they're all their
creative refusal and conscious social
experimentation has placed throughout
human history
some early critics of the book have
asked have asked for unpacking the term
conscious social experimentation
perhaps even of itself the term does
evoke the idea of a group of people
getting together and rationally imposing
their will on the world
in light of what wisdom has been
discussed in this paper however we
suggest that the rubric of conscious
experimentation certainly can without
contradiction
in both forms of mismaking
thank you
thank you thank you so much for this
wonderful presentation and now hand over
um to michael before we discuss the two
michael edwards over to you
thanks um thanks so much alpa um
yeah i'm really happy obviously to step
in it's such an honor to speak about
david in this setting um
what i'm going to to read is is also a
work in progress and it's a short
version of a chapter that will be coming
out in a volume organized around david
graves anthropology and edited by holly
high and josh reno
and
the piece is called forward thinking
reading a revolution in myanmar
so
i would never have expected ruth to join
the revolution
but then so much of what's happened in
myanmar this year has been somehow
unexpected
from the coup itself in the early hours
of the 1st of february to the scale of
the popular reaction
friends who expressed little interest in
politics or protests during my field
work only a couple of years ago have
been in the streets
striking has been the role of young
women women like ruth a christian born
in the chin hills who works at a church
in yangon where i did much of my
research
as the uprising grew through february
ruth's posts filled my facebook feed
selfies in covet face masks amid
swelling crowds around the soulay pagoda
memes mocking the generals behind the
coup
photographs of victims shot by security
forces
one thing not surprising has been the
brutality of the crackdown
as it intensified in late february and
early march ruth's post showed her
wearing not just a face mask but also a
helmet and goggles
as pentecostals believers like ruth have
also been praying
one video streamed via facebook live had
about 20 members of her church engaged
in a session of collective prayer
entreating god to save myanmar
such prayers were commonplace during my
field work but this one resonated with
the revolution then building momentum in
the streets
put to the rhythm of a familiar call and
response chant made famous in the 1988
uprising the prayer replaced the usual
rejoinder
ye
or our cause our cause with amen amen
what draws ruth and others so fully into
the revolution through protest and
prayer
there's been much said about how a
decades experience of a more open public
sphere makes return to military rule
impossible to countenance
many have also remarked on how this
moment has transcended lines of
difference that have long animated
myanmar's politics with qin christians
and even rohingya muslims manning
barricades alongside majority burman
buddhists
but maybe part of an answer also lies in
the imagination
and i say this because of another
question i've had watching myanmar's
spring revolution unfolding from afar
what would david graybar make of this
graver never wrote about myanmar but he
was of course deeply interested
intellectually and practically in
revolution in rogeva and elsewhere
and for him the question of revolution
was tied up with a question of the
imagination
in revolutions in reverse he
distinguishes a transcendent form of the
imagination the terrain of fiction and
make-believe of imaginary creatures
imaginary places imaginary friends
from an imminent form one not static and
free-floating but entirely caught up in
projects of action that aim to have real
effects on the material world
it was a lot of form of imagination that
interested him in the context of
revolution
and in the essay graeber contrasts an
ontology of violence where being
realistic means taking into account the
forces of destruction with an ontology
of the imagination grounded in the idea
to use his oft quoted formulation which
we we heard just now that the ultimate
hidden truth of the world is that it is
something that we make and could just as
easily make differently
now graber never wrote about myanmar had
he not died last september that wouldn't
have remained true for long
[Music]
some years ago he agreed to what to
write the forward to a new edition of
edmund leach's political systems of
highland burma
the forward was never finished so we
can't know what graber would have
written we can't know how he would have
engaged with raymond's firth's original
somewhat laudatory forward
we can't know how he would have dealt
with leach's later reappraisal when he
acknowledged that he'd somewhat
essentialized gumsa and gumlao the
kachin categories famously at the heart
of his analysis
we can't know how he would have situated
the book in relation to debates in
anthropology in the decades since or how
he would have dealt with critiques that
have been directed towards it including
from kachin scholars and especially amid
growing calls to meaningfully decolonize
the study of myanmar
but what we do know is that greybar was
a fan
edmund leach he once wrote may have been
the man who most inspired me to take up
an anthropological career
leech was for graber a model of
intellectual freedom
references to leach appear across
graeber's body of work including
citations of the younger leech and the
older leech following his so-called
conversion to structuralism
a break which as chris fuller and
jonathan parry note has probably been
overdrawn
not only are they striking continuities
in the sort of questions leech asked of
data they write and the sort of and the
sort of answers he offered
but more importantly he kept faith
throughout his career with one broad
vision of the anthropological enterprise
now if the same might be said of graber
it's not the only way in which the two
men were similar
both thought across relatively long
stretches of time 140 years in the case
of leach's study of the oscillations of
kachin political systems
millennia in the case of graber's work
on debt and his recent collaboration
with david wengrow
both are also prolific and lucid writers
eager to engage audiences beyond
anthropology
including incidentally via the bbc which
broadcast lychee's wreath lectures in
1967 and graber's 12-part series on debt
in 2016.
what james laidlaw and stephen hugh
jones write about leech could just as
easily be said of graver that the
lessons of anthropological inquiry were
relevant to the everyday moral and
political questions that were being
debated all around him
both were also interested in the micro
and macro forces that impacted the
production of knowledge in anthropology
and both reflected on how their own
biographies and all be extremely
different insider outsider positions
shaped the work that they produced
there are however few references to
political systems in graeme's corpus
which raises another question
what would he have written in this
forward
it's impossible to give a definite
answer graber was far too creative for
that but it's probably not going too far
out on a limb to suggest that
imagination might have been a central
theme
for what are the political categories of
gumsa and gumlao analyzed by leech if
not products of the imminent mode of the
imagination that interested graber
one reference that does appear at points
throughout graber's writing
is to a is to remarkable each made in
his short 1982 treatise simply titled
social anthropology
there leech suggests that the
distinction between humans and
non-humans is not that the former have a
soul but that they're able to conceive
or imagine that they have one and thus
that it's imagination not reason that
sets humans apart
if imagination is for leech and graber a
general feature of the human condition
it's also one thrown into relief at
certain moments like moments of
revolution
when one tries to bring an imagined
society into being greba wrote one is
engaging in revolution
it's maybe not too much of a stretch
then to also imagine that if he'd been
writing the forward to political systems
this past year graber would be attending
to the revolution underway in the
valleys and the highlands that feature
in liech's book
a revolution whose participants like
ruth imagine not just a political system
in myanmar with the military no longer
in charge but a society transformed in
myriad other ways
around 2011 as myanmar started to emerge
from five decades of military rule
ruth's church and other pentecostals
intensified their evangelism efforts
seeking to win converts in a country
where about 90 percent of the population
are buddhist
taking advantage of the political
opening and with an eye to the spiritual
rupture it was thought to herald these
christians began to preach more
energetically than they had in years
even before the coup there was evidence
that the rupture might not be
forthcoming a sense that liberalization
was benefiting only well-connected
cronies new forms of censorship
impinging on what was supposed to be a
newly opened public sphere
an ascendant buddhist nationalism
rendering increasingly precarious the
position of minorities and playing out
most horrifically in the treatment of
the rohingya
there are also a few signs that
buddhists were suddenly interested in
jesus
though this did little to den my
friend's commitment to evangelism
god works in his own time was the
frequent refrain
how in this understanding to make sense
of the coup
the immediate days after the military
seized control detaining elected leaders
including unsung su chi was strangely
quiet
healthcare workers and teachers were
among the first to go on strike garment
workers followed soon after
as the civil disobedience movement took
shape more people took to the streets
by the middle of february tens of
thousands of protesters were assembling
each day in klaydan a busy commercial
neighborhood near yangon university
ruth was among them
we'd been in touch since the hours
following the coup she sent photos and
videos of the swelling crowds in one
image her white sneakered foot stamps on
a poster of the face of mine online the
general behind the coup
taped to the pavement for protesters to
walk over
in another she holds up a placard with
the words justice for myanmar
young people will not be turning back
she wrote in one message
a series of photos posted in late
february on shin national day shows ruth
wearing the traditional black red and
green associated with the part of the
chin hills where she was born the
spokesman for the parallel government
established by the parliamentarians
deposed by the coup has been a prominent
shin christian doctor dr sasa
at certain points protest signs
featuring his face seem to eclipse those
featuring unseongsu cheese
in late february ruth posted an old
photo of her with dr sasa with the
caption may the lord bless you and use
you for our nation and for his kingdom
dr sasso's role has been particularly
important to my chin friends accustomed
like other ethnic minorities to being
treated like second-class citizens if
citizens at all by a state whose
leadership has been dominated by burman
buddhists
the literature on ethnicity in burma has
often been in dialogue with edmund leech
for better and for worse
his arguments in political systems are
so well known to anthropologists that
they hardly need repeating
his analysis of the oscillations between
political categories the hierarchical
gumsa and the egalitarian gum wow is
deployed to attack the equilibrium
assumptions of his structural
functionalist colleagues and their
allied tendency to treat ethnic groups
as bounded units
social systems leech argues do not
correspond to reality
they are models used by the
anthropologist and by those they study
to
impose upon the facts of figment of
thought
such models find their clearest
expression for leech in myth and in
ritual which present the social order in
its ideal form
conjuring it by acting as if it already
existed
such a model importantly does not float
freely from the messy world of social
facts it can never have an autonomy of
its own
critics of leech have honed in on his
nonchalant confession towards the end of
the book that he's frequently bored by
the facts
this attitude they charge means that his
analysis floats more than a little too
freely
one might with justification right mandy
sudan and francois robin accuse leech of
reducing the kachin's fear to a kind of
intellectual laboratory without any
expression in reality because of the way
in which he molded his case study to a
theory rather than the other way around
i'm sure graber would have dealt with
these criticisms in his forward but less
certain what he would have said about
them or how his own view of the
relationship between facts and theory
would have shaped his assessment
my main hunch though is that graeber
would have devoted much of the forward
to what leech tells us about the as if
that otherwise glimpsed in ritual and
myth but also firmly tethered to social
action
such and otherwise the space of the
imminent imagination drew graves
attention throughout his anthropology
even when he wasn't using the term
consider his forward to another book the
chimera principle by carlos severi which
deals with the relationship between
ritual objects memory and the
imagination
graber praises the book for showing that
imagination is a social phenomenon
dialogic even but crucially one that
typically works itself out through the
mediation of objects that are to some
degree unfinished teasingly schematic in
such a way as to mobilize the
imaginative powers of the recipient to
fill in the blanks
he goes on to suggest that what severity
shows for the relationship between
people and objects has broader
implications for the relationship
between people themselves
but the focus here and what david smith
martin holbrood and martin peterson
might call technologies of the
imagination the conditions from which
imagination emerges in an
underdetermined form expresses
grave as interest in that form of the
imagination rooted in social reality
it's also one that when communicated in
the subjunctive mood of myth or ritual
might to use a word of which graber was
fond pre-figure realities to come
i think it's likely that it's this
element in political systems that graver
would have honed in on in his forward
particularly if he'd been writing it
this past year watching the revolution
in myanmar unfold
as the crackdown in myanmar grew more
brutal through march
protesters like ruth continued to be in
the streets
by late february we shifted our
conversation from facebook messenger to
signal because of the safer encryption
that that app offered
still ruth continued to post on facebook
using a private vpn to access the site
in the face of the junta's effort to
block it and periodically the internet
altogether
her content grew more graphic
in early march she posted a widely
circulated video of three paramedics
being beaten by security forces
videos of shootings followed daily
her posts were usually accompanied by
the slogan the revolution must succeed
in the months since i first drafted this
paper myanmar's revolution has continued
to evolve
just as the country ought to be
considered world historical as the
historian jonathan sahar suggests so
those involved in the uprising continue
to make history through their ongoing
resistance
amid a military assault that has been
especially vicious in shin state
what would graber have made of this
unfolding revolution
unfolding is the operative term
every real society is a process in time
leech famously writes in the
introduction to political systems
and as tembio suggests there's much in
leech that resonates with or prefigures
perhaps johannes fabian's critique of
anthropology's routine denial of
co-evilness
there's an irony then that many of the
critiques of leitch's book focus on his
illusion of the historical circumstances
in which his study took place
it's also worth noting that in the 1964
introductory note to the book leach has
nothing to say about the coup that took
place in burma in 1962 or about the
kachin uprising against the central
state which started one year earlier
it's quite possible likely even the
greatest forward would have gone in a
completely different direction to what
i've imagined
it's possible that he would have made
much more of the charges of idealism the
ways in which leech's attempts to
connect the ideal to the real apache
the ways in which a gap between the
imagination as theory or model and
social facts remains such that the
imagination that comes through in leech
is perhaps more transcendent than
imminent
it's also possible that he would have
made much more as others have of the
place of status seeking individual
action in leech's analysis that
inheritance from malinowski
actions stemming perhaps not from an
ontology of the imagination but from an
ontology of violence an ontology recall
that foreground's force and power
and an ontology incidentally in which
men online and others behind the coup
and subsequent subsequent crackdown also
seem to be rooted
there are no doubt other reasons for
graver's admiration of leech present
perhaps engraver's invocation of a
certain ideal of an anthropologist at
the end of his essay anthropology and
the rise of the professional
managerial class
an aristocratic ideal who recognizes
that what drew us into this line of work
was mainly a sense of fun that playing
with ideas is a form of pleasure in
itself
and ideal importantly that should be
open to everyone
there are also echoes relatedly in the
style of argument
a style that that might be thought of as
revolutionary
not in the poor line sense of rupture
but in the sense of turning something
around or upside down even if one
completely disagrees with the final
analysis
a meaning perhaps also captured in part
of the burmese word for evolution
ye with its sense of reversing or
turning things over
there are differences and
discontinuities too where leech as
labour and hugh jones write seems to
have proceeded not from any consistent
political opinion
graves immersion in anarchist practice
anno kate animates much of his
anthropology and especially his interest
in pre-figuration
but another similarity is that graeber
and leech were not just prolific writers
but prolific readers too
geertz's answer to the question what is
it that the ethnographer does is that
they write
well yes but they also read
holbraad and peterson asked whether it
might be possible to see ethnography
itself as a technology of the
anthropologist's analytical imagination
leach of course claimed to have written
up his kachin analysis in the absence of
field notes famously lost amid the chaos
of war
notwithstanding what gets said about the
power of leech's photographic memory we
might also ask what kind of imagination
did that entail
there's been much said about the place
of the imagination in the writing of
anthropology but less perhaps about
imagination's role in its reading
if all ethnography is fiction as leach
claimed in one of his final public
lectures but even if it isn't what
imaginative faculties are engaged in
reading it
what modes of speculative reading do we
pursue through gaps from afar of
facebook posts of texts that don't
really exist
in his forward to sever his book graber
pushes against the utopian ideal of a
text produced by a single unique genius
instead he argues everything turns on a
tacit complicity whereby the author
leaves the work in effect half finished
so as to capture the imagination of the
interpreter
a complicity in which this seminar
series clearly partakes
how then do we read with an imagination
that is a social phenomenon dialogic
even one that works through the
mediation of things unfinished and
incomplete
unfinished and incomplete like myanmar's
revolution
ruth is also working in the presence of
something that doesn't really exist and
didn't even in the years of so-called
transition
a democratic myanmar that is both
politically and for her spiritually
saved she was doing so even before the
coup
but in continuing to defy the military
just as she continued to evangelize in
the face of indifference she and others
act as if they live in a world not just
where the revolution must succeed
but in which it already has
and then imagining that world they work
to bring it into being
thanks so much michael for this
brilliant paper um
it's been such a joy to have all three
of you presenting today
and um i'll just take my prerogative as
chair to maybe just start with a
question and i see that there's others
in chat i will invite nick and jonah
after me um
uh yeah i just i mean michael you raised
the question of imagination which was
going through my head as megan and julia
spoke and i'd like to ask megan and
julio about the role of imagination
which surprisingly didn't kind of
feature in your in your presentation at
all
um
the relationship between myth and social
organization being this kind of
dialectical creative process really
is central
uh to what you drew out but what is the
role of imagination there and what is it
what is the relationship between myth
and imagination
um
uh and and you know how do you
differentiate the two um is is what i'd
like to ask you about
and michael yeah it's really um this
this uh this
that i remember david getting asked to
do um the uh
the the introduction to
a new volume of
um political systems of highlands
and burma going um
uh going out and and and
and this was quite a long time ago
and then um we had uh you know when
david and david were writing the door
and i remember sending them about three
pages of comments on
on um on leech and why gomsau and gumlao
didn't feature at all in their in their
analysis and um and then what was really
curious because given you know the
significance of this movement from
hierarchy to hierarchical egalitarian
societies back and forth and you know
morse and the eskimo was there but why
not
why not leech
and then um i was even more surprised to
find and i didn't have a chance to ask
david about this you know in the final
version of the dawn that leech isn't
there at all
and um so i wanted to i guess maybe push
you on this a bit like what i mean what
given the critiques that have come out
or on leeches work and leech's own kind
of admissions afterwards
i mean maybe maybe um maybe
maybe it just became very difficult
because in the end gumsaw and gumlao
were myths for um
leeches version of anthropology
rather than anything to do with
the shannon kachin in in burma
and maybe that is why it became very
difficult to write about leech at all um
um
and just it's just a kind of proposition
um you know so it's just curious that
this forward never got written despite
the fact that it was quite quite a few
years and david was writing so many
other things and the fact that there was
no um that there's no mention of leech
at all in the dawn despite the kind of
centrality of the of the arguments
okay so you're just putting trains for
the two of your presentations in
conversation with um with each other
um okay and then i will
hand over to um nick first
do you want to address that
yeah i'll give michael a chance to think
um i think i'm repeating in your upper
yeah okay uh
yeah this is a really great question
about imagination and and julio and i
actually went back and forth quite a few
times because we we were trying so hard
for most of when we were preparing this
paper to just try to get our heads
around what turner actually says rather
than kind of filling in our own bits
about what we think uh you know what
graeber said and how it came from turner
and one of the things that we kind of
kept coming up against it was this
tension between
turner maybe making an argument about
how myth reproduces certain forms of
social order versus another argument
which would be that in the process of
drawing attention to action in the way
that we've kind of described in the
paper um that
that the you know myth doesn't i think
we're trying to write it that myth
doesn't only reflect uh given forms of
social organization um it actually
encourages um or fosters kind of
reflection on on those forms um of
social organization and then and kind of
in inherent in that uh is a process of
kind of conscious social experimentation
and imagination and so on a kind of
creative refusal and we see that much
more in david's work i think um than we
do in in terry turner's work um but but
yeah that's just perhaps our reading but
i don't know if uh
yeah i mean
um
david grabber had always always had this
critique of what he called the cartesian
imagination because some points of the
imagination came to detach from
a social action and
in a way it means like the kayak is
exact opposite because if there isn't
that sort of
sacrificiality between social
organization and myths it means that the
imagination really isn't really
immaterial it takes that cartesian form
so yeah it's definitely a concert we
should
it could definitely fit in for sure um
yeah
thanks
yeah thanks alpa um yeah the question of
i guess yeah why leech is kind of left
out maybe um and i think it probably
comes back to the to the relationship
between facts and theory
um i remember and and other people who
would have been david's ta would know
this but leech does feature in one
lecture in his um introduction to social
anthropology
first year course um titled dynamic
models i think and there um
offers up the the leeches analysis and
then asks the question of whether it
might not stop but whether it might
still be relevant and helpful even if
all the facts are wrong um in light of
critiques of leech that have made been
made by by so many um in the years in
the years since um and so i wonder if
there's something about the two david's
commitment to some kind of like
empirical rigor in this book and the
need to really ground
their analysis in very solid data that
means leech isn't particularly helpful
um for what they're trying to do there
even if it might be helpful as a kind of
a spur to the anthropologist's
imagination
um there's an interesting um in this
this uh
uh sort of series of reflections on
british social anthropology that leech
published called glimpses of the
unmentionable he talks about how he was
often exacerbated with the empiricism of
the kind of the crowd at lse firth and
others
but at the same time he wasn't willing
to sort of follow levy strauss
into into as at least as he sort of
phrased it um
a position where theory is really all
that matters and data is is is
unemployment is unimportant so i think
it's maybe
if they're somewhat similar on the
relationship between kind of theory and
data in in the kind of comparative
impulse of their anthropology maybe
graeber was a little bit hesitant to
sort of invoke leech in the service at
least of those more public-facing
arguments that he's making in places
like the dawn of everything
thanks
thank you nick i'll invite you to ask
your question
thank you very much and thanks to
everyone for their presentations they're
really great um i have to confess i've
not read the fire of the jaguar so i
really appreciated the clarity with
which megan and julio
summarized it but i was also struck as i
was listening by how similar at least
some of the aspects of the explanation
sounded to elements of uh roland bath on
mythologies
which was coming out at the end of the
50s so would have been in the air i
guess when turner was a graduate student
and has had an influence ever since and
so i just wondered how particularly
there i'm thinking about this idea of
myth being something that is actually
historically
situated and constructed and yet
nevertheless obscures that aspect of
itself by putting forward a super
historical supercultural set of claims
um which of course is then inspired
feminist anthropologists like shelly
errington say well we need to kind of
think more creatively and critically
about how we see these kind of troops
when it comes to things like mythologies
of binary gender and that was in the
early 90s and so i just wonder how does
that genealogy of kind of thinking
critically
about myth to
put forward what i would view as
progressive um emancipatory ways of
thinking about the world
fit alongside the turner grey bird
genealogy i mean was bath actually an
influence on turner was turner trying to
move away from
um that kind of barthian tradition are
there things that the turner grape
tradition adds or calls attention to
that we don't get from bath i just
wonder how it all connects up within
this broader field of
studies of myth in anthropology and
cultural studies
uh it sounds like one for the next paper
that is
yeah i mean um
you know while writing newspaper we
always and we talked hard about
what the catholic myth contains what
really you know are the stranger
literature literature that comes in um
so yeah we're still thinking about that
thanks for the question but actually on
the question you asked
um
what you know how about fits into it we
act we have um an answer from david
himself because
um like a few weeks ago as we were
researching the paper we
encountered this we came across this
classic twitter spat tweet this pattern
with david graver in it and uh wait was
asking whether there are any left-wing
theorists
that's a completely different territory
because they see
his book which is called mythology if
i'm not mistaken and as sort of an
analysis a synthetic analysis of
consumerism and ideology so you saw that
it's very different from
say what
levistos was doing
um
yeah i mean it did but this is the point
it did uh it made us question a number
of things first i mean firstly just how
as studio says how distinctive all of
this is and because there were other
parts of the paper where we're writing
it and thinking oh this sounds like you
know like the the sort of focus on
action is surely not something that's
unique to terry turner um and and or to
david graber so
um and it also got us thinking about
this question of like what you know we
we talk about
the kind of contemporary myths um and
this maybe relates also to to jonah's
question because it comes up next is
that we talk about contemporary myths
but you know are we lumping a load of
other things together you know what's
the distinction between myth and
ideology and and other forms and i think
that david kind of picks up on this i'm
not so i'm not entirely sure how uh
sophisticated the answer is really on
on the twitter thread but um but it's
certainly something that raises those
those questions
um yeah to me to be uh researched
further thank you nick
um just to add to that on the
progressive theory of myth i mean why
not include
all those theorists of utopia
which is you know a form of myth right
um so it depends on how you define myth
um i guess um that's going to be crucial
to how you progress the paper
um okay um uh i'll hand over to jonah
and then to hans and then yes lad
so
jonah first thanks um yeah so during
megan and julia's presentation i just
wrote this question which is that
maybe you partially answered it already
actually megan but i was thinking about
common myths in our society now and one
that came to mind was the myth of blitz
mentality
um and i was actually been um i was
actually away for the last two years i'm
so i might have actually got the myth
wrong the kind of meaning of the message
of the myth but it seems to fit your
description
uh of a myth of social creativity that
has now been lost i.e the way that
people were adaptable during that crisis
and and resilient and how now in
contrast we're not able to to act in
that kind of way
um
but this seems like a very conservative
a very super unprogressive myth um
so i was sort of struggling to put those
two together so can you help me make
sense of that
yeah it's a great question thank you
jenna and hi nice to see you um
yeah i think uh we talk about a
progressive study of myth i know i'm
going to come back to your question but
it's worth raising that point that in
the paper you know what is progressive
uh is supposed to be the way that myth
is approached through a focus on action
basically um but in that section where
we talk about the kind of curious
relationship between contemporary myths
and
and kind of virtually all other myths
and i think what's what's important
there is not that the myth itself
contains kind of progressive politics
necessarily you know we were keen to try
to explore in the third section actually
myth can have you know can be quite
regressive i suppose
um but to explore whether a myth um
contains within it the id you know that
kind of core
idea that it's a creation you know of
that it's created by people and then
that's that is progressive obviously but
it doesn't necessarily mean um you know
that the content of myth itself uh is is
some sort of progressive form i don't
know if that kind of answers the
question but basically that you know we
can have a myth that uh that is really
unprogressive in its politics or
aggressive in its politics but that
still uh takes stock of the fact that
you know these kinds of politics are are
human creations versus you know a myth
that seems to deny that possibility
entirely which is sort of what has been
being explored in the dawn of everything
thanks that's really helpful
thanks hans
yeah i was just reading deborah's
comment i mean that's kind of where
where i'm going as well uh i have i mean
my first question is so where does the
imagination come from i'm really
skeptical in the way in which you
presented it uh like circular causation
of myth and
social organization i mean sure there's
a connection but if it's just a circular
causation what where does the newness
come from the difference is it is not
just the repetition of the same forever
and therefore essentially conservative i
mean even even turner even if it's
action
and um
my my point i mean to linking this to
leeches leech is clearly conservative i
think it's really
kind of i don't know
forcing a lot to see like progressive
elements there michael i know you
there's a quote where he said um
he didn't take any political position i
think that's kind of a typical you know
liberal disguise so instead of saying i
that's my politics uh excusing others of
being influenced he sits in in cambridge
and gives a kind of a liberal elite
comment on the state of the world
hoping it stays like that and no one
rocks the boat and and so that is both
in his explicit politics like when he
speaks about national politics in the uk
but even more so in academic and
personal politics
where he excludes lots of others so so
there's a real difference here um
with the the way david refers to him in
this uh managerial classes essay where
he says we should all be aristocratic
like leech but because
it should be open to everyone and that
precisely is what leach did not do he
did not open uh the kind of the
imagination to everyone and in that
sense it's very similar to the way in
which
megan and julio discussed lady straws
that the imagination or the kind of
substantive agency of the the agents
themselves is is actually excluded and
privileged to the analyst
so sorry i i i have much more to say and
i hope we continue the discussion great
presentations
thanks mike you want to address that oh
you can take it
i mean yeah i mean i i don't know i
don't have a lot to say i mean hans um
i've spoken about this a little bit
already i mean it's certainly not my
intention in this paper to present leech
as a progressive and i think what's
interesting about i mean that david's
admiration of leech is interesting
precisely because of the difference in
their in their politics and their
position
um these are the elite institutions and
and in anthropology itself um
i think
i think the other thing to say i mean i
think i think that's a good point about
the sort of the not not having a
consistent political opinion as a kind
of example of that kind of the radical
centrism or what we might call it today
um but
i do think that maybe what what leech
and graber draw our attention to is is
is contradiction actually and and and
the sort of the political contradictions
that people hold as anthropologists and
as people and as people who sort of
speak on current
political affairs in in in the world and
i think you can see that in in david as
well and and his position vis-a-vis the
labor party vis-a-vis the lsc and then
his politics and how how all this gets
kind of held together in a in an
individual
um
the other thing to say just briefly is i
mean of course this wasn't leech's view
like leech in in um spoke of himself as
a radical at home but someone unwilling
to say anything critical of of societies
elsewhere um so
it's interesting i mean i think when
we've spoken about this before as well
it's interesting to think about it if
david's
uh ethnography of madagascar is is is
kind of critical in the way that you'd
you'd want sort of leech to be critical
of of burma i think there's questions
maybe that we might ask about about that
as well it's it's possible that that
graber was much more comfortable being a
radical at home than he was in terms of
critiques he might make of of people in
madagascar and their politics
thanks megan
who addressed this at all or yeah
yes just a
point that enhanced
about the circuit causality um i think
that
i think turner there kind of borrows
vocabulary from cybernetics where secret
causality does not
really does not mean such a direct
correlation uh it refers to sort of two
levels of self-organizing systems
within a hierarchical structure so
changes in one does not automatically
you know lead to change to the other so
they change the the level of insulin the
level of influence kind of depends on
the on various constraints and structure
itself so
yeah
we're not suggesting there is
a total correspondence between i mean
time is not suggesting that um but yes
like
without um that caveat uh yeah the
language kind of might be misleading
yeah
i'd make that
um i also yeah i was when we were trying
to write this paper i was trying and
sort of why i included the trickster
example because it was one that i
understood a bit better
i was trying to understand this
relationship between
um you know what was going on in the
myth and the particular forms of uh you
know social organization that we're
trying to be reproduced or whatever in
this internal model and and one of the
things that comes up in his right he
does mention
um kind of he doesn't really explore it
maybe enough well i need to read a bit
closely if i can bring myself to do it
um but he refers to the relationship
between actions and um and social
situations so he's sort of
in a way sort of providing a space
within the myth or he's talking about
myth as providing a space where um you
know particular actors can explore
a range of possibilities essentially
that follow from particular actions that
are not you know that
aren't neces you know there isn't an a
kind of cause necessary causal
relationship between them they might
adapt depending on the on the situation
and so i was trying to kind of make
sense of that and see whether that is a
space for for kind of imagination or
creativity because it's sort of saying
well if you do things in this way it
might end up like this or it might end
up like this and there's a there's an
element of kind of uh of introspection
um that is is sort of
passed on to the to the actor themselves
to consider you know how their actions
might have you know one effect or
another and to choose sort of how they
behave within that context um i don't
know if that helps a bit but there seems
to be some space essentially for
reflection uh and introspection and
imagination within this uh kind of
exploration of different possibilities
or different consequences of actions
thanks
there's some helpful comments from um
said luckett in the chat and also from
webk manoosh who doesn't have a mic
um but for now i'd just like to
give the floor to yash lad please
thanks
thanks everyone for the really amazing
presentations uh i think my question was
about just this connection between
uh the logical hierarchies that
we find in the forward that david talks
about you know the emergent levels of
actions and so forth and uh social or
real hierarchies you know and i think
like other reasons why like turner's
description of it seems to be
progressive is because
he doesn't
say that like the logical hierarchies
necessarily always imply like real
actual
relations of domination between people
um
so my question was just around
what do you think to be the relationship
between these two types of hierarchies
because like i've been trying to write
about these ideas myself and it's that
that has been quite difficult to explain
to people who are not as familiar with
like turner's work for example
and i was just curious for example if a
ritual is that domain where like logical
sort of cognitive hierarchies
get transformed into real ones but then
turner's idea of itself as patterns of
action already kind of blurs the lines
between myth and ritual you know
and then there's another example from
philosophy where uh roy bhaskar for
example has this idea of um
materiality and dummy reality but like
demi reality is this world of like
impressions and deceptions uh and so
forth but it's ultimately underpinned by
relationships of solidarity which is
what he calls uh dummy reality so that's
another way to maybe explain how
everyday kind of logical hierarchies
turn into like real ones
so i was just curious to have your
thoughts on like how that process might
actually like unfold in real life you
know
how these sort of hierarchies become
real ones uh yeah
yeah i must say i need to think about
this a bit more but um i do it does make
me think of a lot of uh david's
engagements with dumont obviously
christine montoms he writes a lot about
logical hierarchies and and a lot of
david's critique is is
sort of interpreting those in terms of
their their um you know in terms of the
actual social hierarchies that they
might kind of put in place or or support
um and i think he has a wonderful
section in his possibilities but also in
in the book on uh in on value sorry
uh where he talks about um and this does
relate actually quite nicely to i think
turner's kind of work and maybe his
influence on david is that
uh it takes uh looking at a logical
hierarchy from the position of the
person who occupies that particular you
know position within the hierarchy uh
for you to recognize whether a logical
hierarchy is is a social one you know so
he talks about cast and he says you know
from the perspective of people at the
bottom
um you know this doesn't feel like a
quality at all obviously um so so i
don't know if that helps at all but
that's certainly something that i've
kind of tried to use uh to make sense of
this and i think that
um
that yeah there are lots of other places
where it's explored uh in his work i
don't know if you have to add
yeah maybe not on the iraqi thing but on
the ritual
point this is something that we still
have together our heads around but um in
the
preface to the
parity chakra uh he talks he relates uh
perriston to victor terra as a theory of
ritual where uh you know victor turner
talks about well drawing from van gaan
that's the yeah yeah classic 100 android
101 and stuff you know
the linear phase and the transformation
and of course the the liminal
stage where all sorts of symbolic
transformations happens also the weird
things happens and for um dictator
that's uh that's anti-structure for
terence turner would be meta structure
would be basically a glimpse into a
higher level of context of the hierarchy
that he's talking about with a
structural hierarchy
um
we didn't include that in the paper
because although it seems very relevant
and still
don't quite grasp it completely i think
and david himself is not being super
clear in the breakfast but uh yeah
there's there's definitely a connection
that if you're not mistaken victor um
talks about it in a book chapter called
in a book called secular ritual
um which i read a long time ago but uh
yeah it might be relevant yeah it might
be
important to look at that chapter for
that
question
thanks for the yeah thanks for the
thank you
thanks
sorry which makes me wonder about the
progressive potential of myth um yash's
question because
you know if you this is it's it's the
introduction to terry turner and the
kyapo i mean doesn't it matter which
societies we're considering in relation
to myth if it was
if it was you know writing about caste
society and the myths produced through
car society we might get a very
different
um
potential
uh in in thinking through a myth i'm
sure this is something that you're
you're going to think through or have
already thought through
um but i will hand over to
julio maybe for the last um last
question there's there's comments also
from deborah which hans mentioned in in
the chat or maybe julio you can ask the
last question and then we'll go into an
informal um informal seminar
thank you thank you and thank you very
much for for your presentations i i had
a question i think i think also uh
following a bit of when the hands were
saying about where does this imagination
come from um i wonder if you could go a
bit more into depth about the the
relationship between these two political
ontologies that david spoke about so the
relationship between imagination and
violence
um
because you know there is there is so
much
within this these two domains let's say
that uh you spoke about specifically
michael that i wonder um if you could a
bit into it once i asked david about it
and he told me that
in his own quirky way that you know
violence at the service of the
imagination is popular insurrection and
imagination at the service of violence
is sort of top-down
totalitarianism so i wonder
what you what you make of that
thanks julio i'm not sure i have a
question that will i mean an answer that
will add more than what you've you've
just said in your question i think it's
i think it's a really good one because
yeah at several places he juxtaposes the
two they're they're in opposition in
this in revolutions in reverse um
the ontology of violence and the
ontology of the imagination but then
also in terms of what he says about the
lopsided view of the imagination um in
in the outside structure of the
imagination at several parts of his in
several places in his writing the two
are also opposed
so it's a very good question i'm not
sure yeah just if that the the context
in which
it would be possible or appropriate to
think about
violence as an expression of of the
imagination or at least of the kind of
the imminent imagination that he he
talks about i'm i don't have a good
answer for you but i wonder if that
might appear for example in some things
that he wrote about roger or or or
elsewhere
okay well on that note i'd like to thank
very much our brilliant speakers
uh for brilliant presentations which
have raised so many thought-provoking
issues which i'm sure we're going to
kind of debate and talk about for days
to come
so yeah a really big round of applause
for all three of you and michael thank
you again for stepping in last minute
um so valiantly um we're going to maybe
just break for a couple of minutes and
for anybody who wants to stay on for an
informal open mic um welcome back uh um
or stay on and and we'll be around in a
couple of minutes uh for another 15
minutes or so
so um yeah lovely to see you all thank
you everybody for coming to the seminar
and participating and making it so
lively and wonderful thank you again
thank you alba
thank you for the questions